---
layout: post
title:  'Untitled stream of consciousness'
date:   2016-07-18 14:13:12 +0200
---

I'm currently sitting at a table of the bookshop "Another Country" in Berlin, Germany at a writing meetup where it's ALL SO DARK AND SILENT AND not serious at all and just really chill ya know. I don't know if I belong here but they sure are a cool bunch. MEANWHILE, I've been spending the past hour listening to music, planning to write up some highly sophisticated music critique thereafter, only to discover that listening to music with all the might of your undivided attention at a writing meetup is pretty weird, not least because you're the only person with their eyes closed (what would they see on my face if I was to have a transcendental experience listening to the song) – insert here non-sequitur play on words on meetup / meat up and not being vegan. So there are things you cannot force, and this seems to be one of them, especially when landing with my chair in such surroundings. So instead, here I am, not feeling like writing anything substantial, for I'm way too happy-happy and all those moquitoes devouring me, I put my socks inside my shoes but now they're feasting on my arms. I hope they don't graw (sic.) some (whoa, just realized I did a pun), because that would be quite... (just making sure, since the pun wasn't very obvious. also, why write "graw" instead of "groo", you say? well, it's the second time I've touched my neighbour's foot, that's awkward AND OH THOSE MOSQUITOES, why on Earth did I pick the exact same seat as last week onononono. All right, I'm supposed to expand my vocabulary by writing but I don't feel like acting sophisticated at all right now, so I might as well just keep blabbering on. Twelve minutes left before the end of the meetup; this text is probably going to end up being pretty long and with less and less substance. OK, just got back from writing the post-schreiben, and I realize just now – O horro' – that this might have been more aptly named a pre- something, since I've prepended it to the text. Oh well, whatever, oh well. Life's really good hier (woops, here*) in Berlin! Opens up loads of new possibilities, tons of new (pretty weird, if you tell me, but that's what's best) experiences, cool people, and cool stuff that I can work on. This music is terrible. My ears can now breathe. Admittedly, it wasn't bad, it's just that these headphones hurt my ears after a while, don't ask why. HEY PEOPLE LOOK AT MY SCREEN, (no, I hope you don't actually, because it'd be pretty embarrassing, don't blow my cover guys), I'm writing so much stuff, lol! I'm such a serious writer, wow, words just come so easily to me. Am I even going to post this? Hmm, it might require some sort of commitment. With every session, a new post, yay! Sounds like a reasonable marketing plan. Four minutes left. This text might end any minute now. WOOOO (I paused for five seconds before writing this, but I don't think it succeeded in generating that existential tensionTWO MINUTES, ah I shouldn't have told you, now you know I've still got a few words to write or is it already over? The text was over two sentences ago, what you're reading is just your imagination making up for lost companionship. --the existential tension created by your thinking it is over.. and waiting.. waiting.. hoping some more sentences might trickle in, and it turned out they did. Should I read again what I wrote?